yourself okay and tell their names. Okay good afternoon I'm Mrs Christina Roy. Today we are
going to organize an oral history interview with Mr and Mrs Majumdar for the Wales Puja Committee
for taking the past memories and the history of heritage of Dugga Puja in Wales. Good afternoon
Mrs Majumdar. How and when did you get involved in the festival for Wales Puja Committee? Okay I
think to be honest you know to remember because it's such a long time ago but as far as I remember
I got a phone call one day I think from in Cardiff you know there were two gentlemen Mr Goddok and
I think Mr Shambu Dars all of a sudden they saying that the Bodhi I need you we need your help I said
what why what sort of help my husband was busy at that time you know he's a single-handedly
practitioner he was so unfortunately he was in you know not home so I had to answer the
phone and everything so he said could you please we're going to start the Puja in
Cardiff but we need some stuff for the Puja have you got this Kosha Kushi Chandan card all the
Puja thing you know utensils for Puja, Allah shak all these things so I mentioned whatever I
got and this decided the day I mentioned that all that was fixed in any way at that time there
was no committee no meeting nobody only few family the initial started Mr Goddok and Mr Shambu Dars
but they invited few family I think you will know already you know perhaps Mr. Miseskaw,
Mr. Mishro, Dr. Animesh Dars, Mr. Palit, ourself and Dr. Barsak all this family the only the
whole estate and if I were Mr. Mishro I told you so a few family they invited and I think Dr.
Mrs. Haldar whether they were there as well isn't it Amadar so they were involved in the beginning so
few families came and they said that whoever the Bengali or Indian you know you tell them we are
doing the Puja so instead of family oriented Puja only few families started so we didn't know anybody
how is what's going to be like that and all so whatever I thought I saw the Puja in our house
in India my mother or grandmother whatever they used to do a Lohi Puja or any other Puja Sharswati
Puja we had in our house Durga Puja also in our Desh so I remember all the things you know Puja
fruits cuttings and what sort of things we need five fruits and sweets and things like that so
that was arranged few people took Shardar but most of all arranging and telling everybody what to do
not to do those two gentlemen was doing and we are sort of working whatever but it was nice good
experience and we're excited that we're going to have the Puja there and we had the Prithima the
first one someone came I can't remember the name the gentleman you might know after what Mr.
Parth she had a picture a painted picture the first one I think you might have in our old
pictures that the first Prithima was painted they brought it in parade and we started the Puja there
first memory what she has done she has jumped few stages yeah but there are other things happen
yeah whatever is in the school and other things then you can't get parade like that you have to
we did series of places then came the back it's good art come again okay the same so what were
the major challenges you faced while arranging or organizing the Puja around those times I
think the the beginning it was the main factor that when we started finding that you know we
spent quite a lot of time in the morning and in the evening time the first thing obviously everybody
gets hungry so food was the main thing factor we get the Prasad fall and fruits and everything
but gradually we started you know thinking in the evening time a lot of people started coming I
mean outside Kadi the Bristol Newport so the audience was coming up so then everybody thought
the collection was also coming up so we thought we better give the order the food and with the
few family member that we were paying more contribution at that time for the meeting the
cost so the food was coming and then gradually when the member came quite a lot and we decided
to you know make up you know the formative committee was formed is the main factor was
beginning you know the food that started with that then you need money so there how to get
about that so everybody had a decision ask him community was not formed so easily there are always
a controversy that and one person I don't want to name he doesn't like the committee so
he said no we are doing puja and we are collecting money everything they let the people come and
enjoy it and whatever confidence and this is only we will control not the committee
so whether there is issues of money then the some or other that gentleman is gone out and then came
to other people they said yes there is a committee to be formed and especially Dr.
Banerjee was came without how can you and how you can handle public money and the public has
every right to know how you spend that money so you will have to give a chart after the puja
and let them see what you have spent so everybody thought it was a very rational and reasonable
judgment so some or other the conquevers and that's it so what collecting the money what would
you think like the money came through like did all the members put in the money or was there a
policy to get money in our fund whatever we got the fund at the end you will see there was always
a deficit so we managed the deficit ourselves so at the end they decided that you you better go
everybody's house and collect the money initially you can see that who are the people who has much
interest in the puja and come with a much more reverence and what you call Bhakti they are the
people they are with us so we go first and then you go other people so we started so we form a
group three or four four or five and in the car they will go and the response was that nearly 50
50 I don't want to say anymore because few checks are bounced so so we don't want anymore
and somebody may say by check I can't see it finally any check book so these are the experience
we had somebody said well next hour another puja is our puja that is number of three their food is
better than yours so no so these are the experience we had and we have to say when you get your check
book we'll come again so this is our experience but there are people who lavishly give the money
without any question so there is a two contrast between the two anyway this was the collection
started but at the end when our fund has grown up gradually and people are coming and coming only
20 people started now there is 50 60 70 80 people then he said we stop collection let them come and
whoever like to give money collection of the whole yeah so that's and we should appoint
chairman vice chairman account accountant there is a controversy whether you should
appointed accountant some says there is no need the treasurer will do the job both and you must
show that that there is account to be shown to the public and let the public have the say in the
annual general meeting then the conception of the registration of the
friends one or two friends they started with solicitor and with a discussion with him but
ultimately it was rejected in the car the registration of the sink in Liverpool they said that it doesn't
comply with the regulations and others so it can't be registered then at the time one member of that
committee died and that is lost work to me was that I can't do it and I'm going now in
within that hospital so you take this charge and do the registration as you can so I said well when
you fail how can I how can I do it how can I do these things all right then I I took it and he
died next day then I thought very much then I went to the country so much they registered then
the other those who were registered I took a note from them these are the way to proceed and then
same solicitor then I invited Dr Sharma and we had a meeting in our house here number of times
and again with the row mr. Rowan row solicitor's name Roger Walter he said oh well it can't be
done I said yes it can be done this is the way to go through so he had a thought about it and he then
he corrected all the forms and applications and everything then there is a covenant that you got
to pay contribution to any earthquake already anything you got to show that you have given them
and you want to show cultural things something cultural going on and you must keep accounting
or accounts and then it will be passed then ultimately passed. Ask a question. I think the
constitution here I think we told already about constitution all the things here okay I know the
committee was formed after a while but did you have to form a new constitution to run the
When the this question of charity when arose and deeply we thought about it the first important
part of the charity in the registered office in Liverpool they will ask the constitution so we
got to run up constitution and as Sandeep has said the meeting was first arranged in our house
and we started drawn up all the process and back to this solicitor and then we sent to Liverpool
for their consideration. Okay we are starting now. How do you think Durga Puja and festival
has evolved over the period? As you know the lot of people come from UK and other parts of the country
like Middle East and others they didn't have much place to go there and offer their offerings to
God and this is the place they find apart from London Liverpool Glasgow they're too far from
them so they came with their own mind that after all God will bless me if I attain and if I get
some holy water then it will be prosperous in my life but that is the fall and everybody some
friends have gone there and attended the puja they liked it very much they attended Pushpanjali they
attend prasad and meet so many people introduce themselves and they go back and to their place
and talk to other friends but have you seen all this yes we will also go with you this is the way
it evolved. So what do you think brought the group together and were like able to hold together now
like how it's been able to sustain till now? Because the group has developed a confidence and
strength in their mind that after all the God is there and God will bring us together this is the
main theme not that the so many people coming introducing ourselves and making friends and
go up is not that it is not seeing the prithima and the image of the prithima and all the
paraphernalia of the offering and anjuli and then home then the fire after the puja and putting
fire on the head these all the things evolved and joined together harmoniously rather than anything
else no criticize to each other no nothing no this is the main thing and after that whatever you
think. Would you like to comment anything about the overall feeling about the festival?
My feeling is this the puja will prosper you cannot stop I cannot stop it is God who will
move the wheel over the head and doing everything in their own way so that the people come and give their
offerings and to them and she or he will bless us that is she is there on the heaven and the
come for one day in a ostomy and they look each other what we are doing that is the
conception people come and offering their medications and everything and puja and
anjuli and that is the way people are coming and coming and also you can see the other part of
this cultural side lot of people like songs lot of people like dance lot of people like chandalika
and all these things they never seen this ago in UK I can see what a great pleasure that is the
Ravindra sumi and not only that the puja brings all the big artists from different parts of
Calcutta or any other parts and they hear their songs they enjoy themselves and that is the cultural
part side of it and not least good food food to morning and lunchtime and night that is a great
enjoyment and all are ready-made and hot they say oh lovely food we are getting that is also
attraction that's it are there any other things which you would like to share yeah that you
want to come back again on it here so would you like to comment anything else on all your overall
feelings about the festival within Kharif yeah I think as I said it before you know the you
heard the first part of that how we struggle but gradually when we had a lot of member came in
youngster got interested then the committee was formed everybody got there took their
responsibility doing the frame but then one person had to do a lot of thing so the variety
program was nice the we have a catering officer who talked about good things and doing that
obviously it's a group activity not individual so everybody worked very hard I wouldn't say
on that gradually gradually it's sort of homo shape and main thing we kept it one thing that
will do the puja as we have done the religious part should be kept it wasn't the change you
know that religious part was done the same but we added doing the cultural program and encouraging
the children to take the part they are also took the responsibility and the decorations and all
a different activity which they more interested you know then to take part otherwise they would
have been bored so those are thing you know gradually gradually we sort of people thought
how to improve the committee's activity to part in it so the youngster came up so the older people
also little bit took little bit backside but they were there to give the advice through the
double collection in the hall came up money came up now now we can it's nice to see that
committee going stronger people are more interested outside of Cardiff I think in Cardiff people
outside of Cardiff when we see the picture in computer people phone from London we saw you in
the puja that's nice to know it's coming up and all this so that at that time we think that few
family worked very hard beginning that's why we kept the puja going and it's now rewarding to see
the younger generation is following keeping our tradition and I hope at least you know they won't
forget about the puja part as much as they can I know you have to time to time with the time you
might have to change something perhaps the time exact time we can't do but as long as we can keep
some of the parties right then I think people won't lose the interest you know that's the main
part of the younger generation now to keep it together not to have a division anymore what I
find myself that I always used to tell that to be a good committee member that you always must
think that we must agree to be thought to you know to have a disagreement if we agree on that
point everybody will have to be agreeing in all point you know but we have a right to disagree
some of the point and contribute our you know comment on that keeping in mind that we are all
doing voluntary job it's not a big job so we shouldn't bring any conflict in ourselves
whenever we are there in the puja committee meeting or doing about the puja everybody giving
their time free everybody thinking about the puja nobody is paid it's not a paid worker so
nobody blamed to every one of the people if somebody fight is wrong very politely they said
that if I were you I would do like that not commenting criticizing and backbiting I think
that is now got to think that if we want to keep up going on next 20 years to what we have done
before we should learn from our mistake I know we haven't done all correct things we have learned
from our mistake every year to year how to improve the thing how to you know get the sweet how to
cut the cost-cutting thing when we started cooking our food on premises we started saving money
previously we used to pay the money for the caterer but a lot of money then remember thought
how to collect the money so this sort of thing came up and now the people are thinking they're
thinking how to improve the youngster doing the same thing now the computer age has come is much
easier previously we used to pay a lot of phone charges phone call we invited people to our own
phone call so we also paid a lot of money from our own but we didn't think about that we thought
we're doing something you know that for our own enjoyment and that is I think kept us going on
which we I think there were some good day bad days but well at the end you know to see mother
got still in Cardiff and now new images being formed new image coming up to the put him up being
built and the card for the children's you know this country's children also know you were all
working very hard for the school project it's nice to see and I'm sorry we are getting older
obvious that we can't help physically be there but I think we have done our share and I think we
should leave it to the younger people and I always salute and I always respect what is there doing
because I we can't do now much so we shouldn't resize but at least we can say time to time
whatever we feel better sort of notice advice I'd say that if you feel it will be nice or if I see
something going wrong I can politely say that that liberty should be that should be given to the
older generation I mean younger people think that all the world they are gone the we won't take
their advice that shouldn't be that would be for the younger generation part that that the older
generation are there if they need some any advice they have to give it they because their
experience is important whoever maybe who have worked very hard I know this is how the
Mrs. Chaudhary is not the number five and number 11 I wanted to say that Mrs. Chaudhary they are
the people who are there in the beginning they also very hard with us so I'm sure they will be
so all the members were not there that doctor I said either not there this is a Mrs. Acharya
I said you will be managing the energy body all the members were really in the beginning they
quite hard who just write and advise and working and Dr. Shambhu Pata passed away who else now
our friend I think we'll mention after and Shambhu Pata I said Dr. Shambhu Pata that one he was our
member so he worked and he passed away so all the members who were there Dr. Ganguly was the
beginning and the member not long he stayed actively but he was also the founder member one
of the Mr. Siendars they were all not actively but in the beginning they all passed away so
with you know you always remember them and whoever did it little bit of contribution I think we
should remember I think we all are human being obviously we'll have a different opinion everything
but at least we will try and that is my prayer to everybody pray to God that everybody in Bengali
group should not only Bengali group or Indian group here they will sort of share their views and
walk together that is the only thing that's the way to prosper I think whatever we are doing and
we are doing we are doing very well so I hope we haven't got any complaint on that I hope
we'll stay a few years more to enjoy your festivity the things you do that's all I think
that I would say at the end number 11 anything else you like to talk about yeah number five
is the what major challenges you faced while arranging or organizing puja the these challenges
are really very controversial as we are very old and afraid and we can't do physically lot of work
for the puja which we did before lot of challenges and criticism come and to say a few words what
challenges are coming major challenges those who are religious and Brahmin and doing puja they are
telling why you were out the we do person to do vogue we do that's not our sastra that not our
sastra written that they will go I said look don't criticize this thing we short of people we can't
get any people and she's religious she comes and does these things so forget about it no we can't
forget these things second thing is this again they said that their widow why you allow in the
presence to touch the bit and the ingredients and all the pots and everything I said there they came
they they offered their offerings so the religious people also forget about this with a mature and
intelligent judgment you will have to proceed and console them that forget these things these are
the these we listen as long as all are offering our puja in the same manner so let them do it they are
also human being unfortunate their widow so you can't send them there you can't do it you just
you put a fight shall you with a black border and side one side don't touch any and make
matrimonial affair don't touch it because this is auspicious the war auspicious doesn't come here
so forget this thing so these are the preliminary challenge we always listen and console them in a
proper way so that we could work together in a harmonious way and sustain these things so
that it can continue for a long long time and now the 11th anything else you like to talk about
well as Krishna you always you mentioned about the venue venue we talked time and again some
people are willing to give quite a bit of fun to buy land but land is not the only answer you
will have to prepare the whole building then comes it and their building is done then electricity
then rate rain then the priest who will where you stay these are all these things come sing and
it is a very difficult task as we see in Indian culture there is a priest and they have been
permanent they are so all these things are very difficult as so deep says the puja pretty by is
now been making so the priests come from India they got to think where they will stay where they
will eat where they will they apart from their journey from going from Calcutta to UK UK to
Calcutta back all these things suppose they are ill who will stand together and do all these things
you got to think a lot of things so we love to have some our own venue so we can say that
well as Pujya Comte has this venue we never had to think separate kitchen separate venue for the
for the home another kitchen and the long waiting room and stage where the cultural function will
be dressing changing room from one actor to the other actor so many things in a minute so it is not very easy